Hello and welcome to another episode of the Fluency First Podcast. I'm here with a very  special guest. Hi. Carol, who is a family friend. Hi, Carol. Hi, hi. So at the start of every episode  we start with small talk. So, Carol, firstly, thank you so much for doing this. It's a pleasure.  I know you are a very busy person, but I'm so grateful that we managed to schedule this in.  Me too. I'm excited. I'm looking forward to it. So how are you today? I'm good, thank you. I've  been away for a few days in Worcestershire, in the Malverns, and I spent some time with a  friend and I went to Stratford-on-Avon Shakespeare's Birthplace to see not a  Shakespeare play, but a modern play which was funny, very good. That sounds interesting. And  recently you went on holiday, right? I did. Yeah, where did you go? I went to Slovenia for  the first time, which was really interesting. It's a tiny country in terms of comparing it  with Britain. It's about the size of Wales, so it's only about 200 miles at the greatest  length. I didn't know it was that small, actually. New Jersey, comparing it with New Jersey is  another comparison. State of New Jersey. Right, right. And it's very wooded, mountainous, green,  green in two ways. So it's green because there are loads of pine trees and countryside, but  also environmentally conscious. So the capital, Lublyana, there's no litter. Sounds amazing. It  is really beautiful. What was the food like? It was very cosmopolitan, actually. I think  traditionally I probably wouldn't have loved it because it's quite heavy Germanic food and I  don't eat meat. But because there's a lot of international influence, there's a lot of good  continental style cooks there in the capital. So now it's time for the next topic,  which is family and connection because, Carol, you are a family friend. Right, I know you through  my parents. So do you remember the early days of getting to know our family? I do. Yes,  I remember coming to one of Rachel's, it could have been her first birthday party or certainly  under three, in the back garden at Conallan Avenue with your wider family there. So I  remember Wendy's sister there and all the kids playing in the garden and Wendy's effortless  hospitality. My mum always used to say, Wendy's amazing, isn't she? She's so relaxed.  She's so relaxed. So my mum got to know your family through coming up here at Christmas and  spending Christmas Eve together. So yes, how did I get to know you? So I got to know Ian  more because we ran quite a lot of training and then he offered me some work when I wanted to  leave my organisation. He offered me six weeks work and that was my jumping off point. I  decided, right, I'm going to go. Wow. And so then I did some work for him and we worked  together on various things. And with Wendy, I got to know her because she came to the women's  group. I can't remember how often we met, but let's say once a month and we talked about deep  personal stuff and we shared all our ups and downs. We shared our inner lives with each other  and Trish who you also know and I were running that group and we used a book that was  written by some expert women's developers and therapists. So we are searching questions  of each other, you know. Wow. Yeah, I mean, just so everyone knows, we went on a lot of  joint family holidays and I have a lot of fond memories of going to France with you. You also  liked French. I did. And obviously at Christmas time we would have parties here and at our  house. So yeah, I also have great memories of that as well. Yeah, I mean the holidays  were incredible because we've spent quite a lot of holidays, either in Brittany in France  or on the Ile de Ré, that very gorgeous island cycling around it. And Harry, my son,  used to love talking to David and seeing him play the guitar. I think it was a bit of a,  he looked up to you in the early days, I think, you know, when he was younger and you  were older. And those holidays were such fun and they were also a lifeline for me because  they were a way of me having a holiday as a woman who later became divorced. So when my  marriage changed, I came on holiday with your family and my child and we were really,  really enveloped in that family environment. And I also got to know your grandparents,  and I've loved getting to know them. And my mum loved getting to know them. So we actually were  on holiday in France with my mum and your grandparents and all of you. I've got pictures  of her bowling on the beach with Peter, your grandfather. Sounds lovely. No, I do remember  the holidays in Brittany even when I was very young. Yeah, but only vague memories.  And the other thing is that also as you've grown up, you know, I've got to know your  nearest and dearest and also helped certainly Emily and Rachel think about their work and  have practice interviews and things. So I've been very honoured as a family friend to do  those things. Yeah, you've helped all of us so much. And you were also the celebrant  at my wedding, right? Yes. How do you describe celebrant? Well, it's the person who takes care  of, holds the whole sort of ceremony. So although I'm not a vicar or a priest,  and I wasn't officially marrying you, I was seeing to it that it went in the way that you  and Jean wanted and that it included everybody and yeah. Right, yeah, absolutely. Yeah, it was  a lovely day. It was the most incredible thing to be asked. I was so honoured to be asked  and I loved doing it. Nearly forgot to ask you to say something. What was it? Was it I do?  Oh yeah. The main bit. Yeah, oh, that's so funny. It was a magical day, wasn't it?  Very, very special. And I was there for the whole weekend, so it was fantastic.  So let's move on to travel. So you've traveled quite extensively, I would say.  Is there a place that changed you in some way?  Gosh, that's a good question. It's interesting because I'm going to talk about somewhere  that isn't that far away and it's Cornwall. Oh, Cornwall. Southwest England. Okay,  and how has it changed you? Well, I think over time. So I went to Cornwall first on my honeymoon  with my then husband and I went there because his family had lived there when my mother-in-law's  father was ill and had TB and he could recover better in that climate in the old days.  And so there were lots of stories and pictures about Cornwall, that part of Cornwall.  So I spent a week there and I fell in love with that part of the country and I subsequently went  back there for holidays with Harry and Martin and then also some really tough things happened.  So my marriage ended and I was in Cornwall when it ended, so that really was tough.  Many things happened to you in Cornwall. So going back to Cornwall after that was really  full of many memories that were difficult and I felt I had to change my relationship  to those memories to be able to keep the good memories despite the break in the marriage  and to reclaim Cornwall for myself. And so I went back quite a lot with Harry  and with other friends and I feel it's a place that I relate to in the next part of my life  rather than always looking back to how it was.  You know this picture, I love this picture because the perspective's all kind of odd,  isn't it? But it's a picture of St Ives, which I talked about elsewhere and it's just  a lovely kind of breezy spring day, I think, looking out at the sea through a window.  I think that's always nice, isn't it? A shot through a window and I like that.  I like that. Little boats on the sea and it's sort of, it's very naive in a way looking,  very sort of odd perspective but colourful, friendly, cheerful.  Has an innocence to it.  Yeah, yeah.  And what's one country or moment from your travels that you will never forget?  Obviously Europe quite a lot but memorably Japan, India and Peru, so longer haul trips.  What will I never forget? A moment doesn't have to be the moment, doesn't it? I think  being in Japan was, Japan's kind of like top of my list for different places. It's such a mixture  of ancient and modern and you know, so I remember, actually I can remember this now,  tell a little story, is that okay?  Yeah, absolutely.  So we, Jean, my friend, dear friend and I that you know, we were travelling  in Japan and we were in the mountains and we were booked into this hotel that we were told  the emperor had stayed in this hotel and it was a bit shabby these days, it was a bit run down  but the tour company said we think you'll really love it, we love it, we think you  should go there. So we got there, we were tired, we were emotional, Jean wasn't well  and we walked into this place and I thought why on earth are we here? I don't like it.  There was, there was, we were greeted with a big fabulous feast of food but we were too  tired and she was not well enough to enjoy it and I remember thinking this is a big mistake,  I really don't like it and we'll have to move on more quickly. Anyway, the next morning,  when she was feeling better and I was feeling refreshed, we took a look around this place  and it had one of those onsen baths where you can relax and it was the women's turn to  have the onsen bath. One morning it was the men's, one morning it was the women's and it  was set in the most beautiful Japanese garden so you could sit in these bars looking out at these  incredibly beautiful Japanese trees and this sort of beautifully shaped garden not far from Mount  Fuji and sit there and I just thought what a difference 24 hours makes. Yesterday I was tired  and crabby, bad tempered and today I said to Jean I love this place, I never want to leave  so you can go from one extreme to the other. This is a painting by Val Hudson who's a dear friend of  mine and it's kind of, I like the different textures in it. She rubs, she puts paint on,  she rubs wax on and then she kind of takes some of the wax off and you get these different  textures. I just love the kind of, it's very, I think it's called quiet conversation  and that you get that sort of meditative feel and the you know you get drawn into it by the  different colours and you know that yeah just the depth of colour that's in it I think draws  me in and in mourning when I look at it yeah I just feel a sense of relaxation when I look  at it. So can you tell me what it was like growing up in London because you grew up in  London? I did, it was amazing growing up in London. Was it? Yeah it was. So what did you  like about it? I loved, I lived in South East London which is a very big green area called  Blackheath. It's very ancient heathland and it borders onto Greenwich Park which is also  very big space of green, Royal Greenwich Park and was a place where Henry VIII had a palace  in times gone by. So there's lots of history on both Blackheath and in Greenwich and lots  of greenery on the edge of London so it's not cramped, it's not, it's very spacious  and Blackheath village as it's called is an old village and so it's not like, it doesn't look  like a classic old English village in the country but it was village-like in the 1950s  which is when I grew up there and I lived on a what we now call a social housing estate  which was newly built along with a newly built school that was very close to the  heath to all this greenery. So what kind of community did you grow up in because you said  social housing estate? So I would call that working class, so I'm from a working class  background and before my parents moved into that two-bedroomed apartment or we called it a flat  the housing estate was quite small, it wasn't a load of tower blocks but it was full of  people who were, there were some people who'd fled I think in the war from places where they  were ostracized, Jewish people, but there were lots of working-class people who were getting  their first home with a good rent and a nice place to live and it was, they were purpose  built so they had, you know, often you would be in perhaps other kind of housing and  sharing toilets and whatever with other people. I didn't do that but we live with my grandmother  before we moved there but here it was a purpose-built flat with its own bathroom,  with a balcony, you know it was a nice place to live. Wow.  And Blackheath is quite a posh place so there's quite a lot of money in Blackheath.  Now or back then? Always, yeah, so there's some incredibly beautiful buildings,  houses that were built so at the top of the road where I lived there's a whole row of big  Georgian houses looking out over the heath towards the park so there's a lot of money  there and there always has been so it was a place that you had a lot of people who could  afford nice things and Blackheath shops reflected that but equally there were several council  estates, social housing estates, around the railway line, the railway line 20 minutes  into central London and the newly built school was a state school and in Blackheath,  well near to Blackheath, there were also schools that were public schools where people paid  for their children to go so you in Blackheath you have a mixture as you do in most places  in England of working class, middle class, owning class I would call them and  a lot of people think class isn't a thing anymore. I think it's still there,  I think it's changed but it's still there. So you grew up working class but you went to  a grammar school right? I did. That's where you have to pass a test the 11 plus  and you get accepted into the school and I heard because your accent  you know it's quite unique I think you had elocution classes right? Yeah. What was that  like? Yeah it's funny because they didn't call them elocution classes so the girls whose parents  had aspirations for them to talk properly because you know if you're properly so I'm  actually a cockney by birth right? Because I was born within the sound of bow bells  but most nobody would think that I'm a cockney because of the way that I speak  although I can talk like that if I want to right? But my sister had a very different  way of speaking to me because of our schooling so we did have speech and drama lessons every  Tuesday throughout one of my years at school and that meant the whole class of girls had to  stand on the stage one by one and talk to the audience of the rest of the class project their  voices to the back of the school hall and say what you'd been pick a subject and talk about  it so it could be what you'd been doing that weekend and you had to talk for a certain  amount of time you had to stand well and you had to give this kind of speech we also had some  books which trained our accent so we said we had books I'm not kidding you which said things  like the rain in Spain falls mainly on the plane the rain in Spain stays mainly in the  plane the classic line the classic line which is in Pygmalion Bernard Shaw's play  you know about training a girl to talk properly so there was this underlying sense that they were  doing us a it was a good thing to be done I didn't ever question it on the other hand  what it leaves you with is a kind of bit of a crazy mixed up kid around your identity  because I don't sound like my family sounds and often when you sound like this people think  you're stuck up that you're a snob that you're looking down on them that you're somehow not  real in some way because I've learned to talk like this I think it's interesting putting it on  yeah so of course and of course we were taught to do that so it wasn't our natural way  of speaking and all the girls had it but in some ways it stuck with me I don't know why  it stuck with me and I think because I was interested in my education and as I went to  university I think you get un what's the word you kind of get you get messages really that  in order to fit in and to get on there is something about the way that you speak  and certainly in the 50s when I was growing up in 60s there weren't lots of different  accents on telly on radio it was a very very posh rp received pronunciation and when I came  to Sheffield I did stick out like a sore thumb I can only imagine yeah so you said when you  came to Sheffield you stuck out like a sore thumb great phrase to learn everyone  how did that feel can you just tell me a little bit about that it felt I mean I was  sort of used to that in a way I wasn't actually no it was very it was very noticeable because  Sheffield's a very working-class city and you're in Yorkshire and in Yorkshire there's it's not  just that you have the short a's like bath and grass and past but you also have quite  a lot of ways of saying things that are particular to Yorkshire yeah a lot of dialect  a lot of dialect words yeah and I was working with I was going around and talking to  16 to 24 year olds who were unemployed and often young men and they so there were a  number of things there so they were often shy and embarrassed and sort of looking at their  boots and not looking me in the eye really and also when they did talk they they spoke quite  quickly with this Yorkshire accent but also with the dialect so you couldn't understand I  could understand them because I'd been an English teacher so and I was very interested  in dialect so I've got a good ear for that kind of thing okay and I picked it up but it  initially it was harder work it's like learning English it's in a in a class and  then going to England and having to really listen to how it's spoken on the ground  and it was like that with them so it took me a while and then of course I could I was  definitely not like them so I think when you've got difference like that and there are all those  things that people associate with how you talk like as I said before people think you're posh  that you're stuck up that you think you're better than they are all those things that go  with that make the actual rapport building and the relationship building with someone you don't  know quite hard you've kind of you've got to you know I felt I've had to work quite hard  at building relationships for people to see beneath beyond that really in a way  beyond the judgements yeah about the accent did you only have kind of like the identity  I don't use the word crisis but that's the phrase identity crisis about you know your  accent when you were young or have you had that throughout you know yeah I don't I didn't feel  it was a crisis because for me by then it was normal but it was it was a sense of feeling  uncomfortable in a new place where I didn't belong and it's a bit like when you read a  novel you know and the stranger comes to town it was a bit like that and there were a lot  of southerners who came up at the same time as I did there was a bit of an exodus from  London because the government wanted to bring people to Sheffield to do jobs to  to create jobs for people outside of London and so there was some resentment about us because  we we pushed house prices up for example so it wasn't just how I talked it was kind of like  oh you're one of them people from London is ruining our stolen our houses right so it was  a whole thing but I think yeah I mean accent I'm I'm I'm grateful for what I've had it has  in the time that I grew up there were advantages to to not being judged by  your working class accent and when I went to university I think it helped me fit in there  in a way that you know I didn't even realize I would need to fit in I had no idea that I would  need to fit in it's amazing it's interesting because I guess like I I am from Sheffield I'm  you know born and bred Sheffield but then I don't really speak like other people from  Sheffield and I've always had that kind of problem with my identity so occasionally if I  go out and people speak with a broader accent I will change my accent to try and fit in  so it's difficult to know what my accent really is because it's always changing depending  on who I'm with yes I think that's natural I when I go home I still say home for London  if I'm in a taxi with a taxi driver I will end up sounding not broad cockney but I will enjoy  get in a way it's a part of rapport building isn't it you you kind of follow the pace of  somebody so there's quite a clipped pace in London quite quick speaking and staccato and  you do the glottal stop you know so there are things that I do don't you just explain the  glottal stop like bottle yeah bottle so you don't say bottle which you would say if you were  trying to talk properly in inverted commas you'd say bottle or butter or gotta do that a bottle  of water yeah so you'd say your t's at the back of your throat not with your tongue  behind your teeth bottle yeah your accent is quite unique do people ever comment on it even  now I wonder do people comment on it now yes a taxi driver commented on it the other day he said  to me you're not from around here are you and where did you grow up and so and actually  it's interesting that make you feel that's okay um I thought oh actually that nobody's asked me  that recently in Sheffield um so I was happy to talk about it he was a nice guy I didn't take  any offense and I think it was just genuine curiosity but it's interesting because you  say my accent is quite unique in a way what the training that I got at school to talk in  a particular way was to make you like everybody else who spoke that way right the kind of rp  yeah receive pronunciation right yeah so it's interesting that you hear it's unique so what  do you hear so what I mean is it's unique for the area yeah you know and um like when  I was a kid you had this vibe this feeling of like being a teacher because of the way you  spoke you know so I kind of always admired the way you spoke um yeah yeah I guess it's a mixture  of things isn't it it's like how you pronounce the words but also there are other differences  in the way that we speak by but it's not just your accent you're also quite eloquent  you know because I think this podcast will become an advanced English podcast  um just because it might be quite difficult for some people sorry everybody no no no but it's good  the words you're using are amazing some of the phrases you're using I just think they're  fantastic you know as a lifelong English teacher I'm always listening not only to  people's accents but also to their word choices their phrases their idiosyncrasies  some people have specific words that only they say or they use I just think it's absolutely  fascinating yeah I mean it's lovely to hear you so I'm interested in what you hear and  what other people say I'm interested in that too as a an ex-english teacher not teaching  how to learn the language but teaching language and literature to young people  and because I've because my degree was in that because I taught in that for five years  because I've always read and studied literature I love words and you kind of pick them up and  you don't know you've got them and and people do tell me I'm articulate is what they say  and I don't know where that comes from I just have that I've just learned well you have a  natural instinct to choose um kind of more specific words you know if you're describing  something and that's what I love you know yeah I've got loads of them in my pocket so I like  to use as many of them I don't do it consciously I don't do it consciously I just  love words yeah absolutely and you're a big fan of Shakespeare I am yeah and and of course you  you write and you're a you know an avid reader and do you think accent still says something  about class in the UK yeah I do so Harry my son who was born in Sheffield a Yorkshireman  he's got short a's bath grass whatever but he talks well like you do in inverted we say well  so there's a judgment in there isn't it tells you that language is is related to class  however his friends who've gone to boarding school and who have got very  rp accents let's say with some of those friends I'm I can't say for certain but  one story that he's told me is that people say to him God your accent's really strong  Harry you know so and it's because of the vowels it's because of the vowel sounds and in that  is a is a judgment so I think I think we can kid ourselves so I think there's lots of things  about class that have changed so education's become more available irrespective of your  class and jobs have become more available we see more representation from different classes  on tv and on the radio nonetheless people are still often interested in your background  and voice is one of the quickest ways that you start to get a sense of that you know  yeah it's interesting because I don't think I can ever say bath and grass  it has to be bath and grass for me I can't change it and I never will  and you shouldn't have to but my use so like um cup I've started saying cup rather than cup  yeah that I haven't started at that I mean that started a long time ago but that did  change in my accent I noticed um but uh yeah yeah accent definitely does say something in the  UK do you like that um I think if it was free of judgment and and kind of assumptions about  it's where people go to next you talk like this therefore dot dot dot it means this so  if it was more about wow that's different that's varied that's rich you know how did you get to  speak like that but it's not it's kind of like there is a sense that you know there's  something missing or there's a lack or there's a shortfall so I think there is it's because of  the next step the meaning that we attach to that or that some people attach to that  I think there's less meaning attached to that sometimes the way that you speak people  assume that you're not as bright if you speak a certain way people see so voice is  another way of to sort of sort do you sound like me or not you don't sound like me it  can be a conclusion that people go so can I trust you do I like you all those things it's  not the voice itself it's what people infer from how you talk and often those things are  not good or they are good if you talk in a certain way she's one of us people like us  is a is a phrase that the sort of top class would use you know oh yeah is she a person  like us darling is she plu  really oh goodness me did you ever feel pressure to sound or a certain way in school or work  I don't remember feeling any pressure at school I think I just I didn't I didn't question it I  just did the did the classes at work I don't think I did I was I was schooled by then that's  how I spoke you know okay I mean you sort of there's a way of talking that's polite and  professional isn't there as well as the accent that you've got so you have to kind of tune  into those things and know you know I worked in a theater box office and you know you you you had  to give service and work in a particular way for my sort of Saturday job to earn some pocket  money so you pick those things up about this is what it means to be in hospitality or in  service to others so you've got to you've got to behave in a certain way and how you  talk comes with that you don't say yep do you want you know you say good evening sir  how can I help you it's so interesting because my mom's first job was working on the market the  vegetable market where she also had to speak in a certain way and have good banter yeah exactly  and very kind of kind of the same but opposite so there were expectations of how you should  speak yeah like if she tried to speak very proper on the market people would I don't know  given her a wide berth I mean it's it's emotionally intelligent you adjust your language  in the same way that you speak a different language in a different country it's like that  in the environments isn't it certain there's a certain way of a vocabulary a dialect for  different jobs even you know yeah so it is time for the last section which is the reflective  and what I call challenge questions so take your time don't feel pressured to answer  straight away so the first question is what's one thing you've learned that you wish  more people understood good question I don't know I think I'm I'm not a very patient person and  I think the importance of patience is really valuable so giving giving time to others  particularly on the roads for example that kind of courtesy so I think patience and courtesy  yeah patience and there's something about in the nhs there's this word civility and there's  been a lot of research that civility saves lives that when you talk to each other well  and kindly and politely and patiently it saves lives yeah I'm a big fan of kindness  politeness and patience and compassion right yeah they all fit together don't they absolutely  yeah um next has your idea of happiness changed as you've grown older yeah I think it has I  think I think I've been lucky to have had a lot of good things in my life and experiences  particularly and I've and reasonably well and I've been able to support myself and  have the things that I wanted so I suppose in many ways I've been able to satisfy a lot  of the things that I might have yearned for and that in itself is a kind of happiness  isn't it but I also realize the value of simplicity and how important that is to me  um and how yeah I think having time to really savor things and take pleasure in small things  yeah really matters good food with friends done a lot of that with your family yeah really  important to me small pleasures even average food with friends yeah great exactly ordinary  food bread and cheese and wine exactly who was it that said that maybe Socrates or  one of the philosophers all I need is just cheese and wine bread cheese and wine and some friends  right and yeah some I don't know what the quote is I'll try and find it um next is if  you could talk to your younger self what would you say mm-hmm trust your instincts more trust  your instincts more yeah definitely would you like to elaborate yeah I think I think there  are times when you have a sense that something is right for you and I think I think there have  been times when I've really acted on that even when I was younger saying no to something  that I didn't know why I was saying no to it but I think was a good no um equally I think  if you if you have a concern about something that you brush aside that keeps reappearing  then your instinct is telling you something and I've done that  and I wish I hadn't done that I mean do I wish I hadn't I did it that was how it was  and I think I could have done something sooner that my instinct was telling me  sooner to wake up and do something so trust your instincts and I like the bit you know the  learn to say no being able to say no for some people is very difficult it is quite difficult  for me it is difficult yeah um kind of a fun one if you could keep one book what would it be  and why oh gosh that's that's very difficult David one you could only keep one book only  keep one book if I could only keep one book I don't know I mean I don't know if it would  be this one I'd have to look on my bookshelf and I got rid of loads of books but it'd  probably be a Jane Austen novel it might be Pride and Prejudice which is quite funny  and it might be Persuasion which has got a bit more sort of sadness in it but it's also  a happy ending right right great and the last question of this entire podcast but a very  important one is what does a good life mean to you well it's sort of a bit like whatever it was  whoever it was if it was Socrates so I think a good life for me means um being healthy  being doing doing things with people you love and eating with people that you love and um  you know treating your family it would be staying connected to my family I mean I haven't talked  a lot about my family but Harry is my immediate family and my extended family in London very  very important to me family and friends is a good life having family and friends and connection  and creativity and nice food and drink absolutely Carol it's been a pleasure  thank you so much for doing this interview if you're still here thank you so much for watching  thank you um remember to get the free pdf in the comments so you can follow this podcast it  will really help you and help your language learning journey so thanks a lot everyone thank  you everybody